# Rotation project instruction for Fall 2022

As discussed in person, this rotation project aims to perform association analysis between DNA polymorphisms and different molecular phenotypes, with an implicit assumption that the former **might** have an impact on the latter.

## Aims

This project is a bioinformatics analysis with established computational routines, although as you will see for yourself that it involves various statistical and probabilistic models for some of the computational steps. 
As discussed at this point you are not expected to understand them thoroughly (although the more understanding you have the more helpful it would be). 
Instead you should keep in mind the following aims: 

1. Execute established analysis in statistical genetics: to help test and improve this protocol --- currently still under active development by others in the lab --- to the extend that people from outside of the lab can follow it without having to ask us too many questions. 
    1. During this process you'll learn to setup a basic bioinformatics environment on your computer, under which these analysis will be performed.
    2. You will also learn to execute codes written in a bioinformatics workflow language called [Script of Scripts](https://wanggroup.org/orientation/sos_meta_script.html).
2. Interact with the lab: there are two ways you should do this
    1. For any issues that initially blocked your progress but you were able to figure it out, please still raise a [github issue here](https://github.com/cumc/xqtl-pipeline/issues) to report the problem and document your solution, so we can incorporate your solution to the protocol and update the website. It will be even better if you could try to fix the issue through sending a pull request directly for us to review. 
    2. For issues you cannot figure it out on your own, please clearly describe your question in slack message and send that directly to me (Gao Wang) and Hao Sun (please include both of us in the chat). We will help you by updating / fixing the protocol / documentation directly and ask you to read again. 
    3. It is NOT beneificial to interact with others in the rotation project. In fact it will harm because you will not experience enough interaction with us (crucial for you to decide if you would like to continue working with us) and we will not interact with you enough to decide your fit for a project.
3. Develop good computational research style: please follow strictly the "Lab rules" on [this page](https://wanggroup.org/orientation/index.html) (ask me if you need clarifications on it).
4. Learn about functional genomics and statistical genetics on your own. 
    1. Papers: [Two review papers under the "Molecular QTLs" section on this page](https://wanggroup.org/learning_center/statgen-papers#molecular-qtls)
    2. Textbook: [Computational genomics with R](https://compgenomr.github.io/book/)

## Assignment

The assignment is [posted here under the Getting Started](https://cumc.github.io/xqtl-pipeline/README.html#getting-started) section. Please follow the instructions to install required software and obtaining example data for performing the analysis. You will then follow all the protocols to run on [this page](https://github.com/cumc/xqtl-pipeline/blob/main/code/xqtl_protocol_demo.ipynb). You will find some other useful information on the lab wiki that may help you. As I warned you before, this is going to be a bumpy ride (by our intention) and good communications will be very important.

### Use github to keep track of your analysis

Please work on github by creating a private repository under your github account (suggested name for the repo is `xqtl-protocol-analysis`) and add me `gaow` to the repo as a collaborator. You should then create your own project folders by following suggestions from the Reproducible Research requirements on the lab wiki **using the folder structure recommended on the Reproducible Research page**, and frequently commit to this repository to document every step of your analysis on the protocol example data, **as well as what you have learned in the process**. Your github commit history will be evaluated at the end of this project. Please keep it neat using `.gitignore` files to exclude folders such as `.ipynb-checkpoint`.

### Contribute to the xQTL protocol documentation

Please make any corrections and clarifications as you see fit (even small changes of wording or fixes of typos) to [the source code of xQTL protocol](https://github.com/cumc/xqtl-pipeline) -- please fork the repository to your own github account, run the analysis from this copy of the repository with the source code, make the changes as you see fit, then send in a pull request (PR) for your changes. In our daily computational work we expect frequent pull requests (in principle, daily) as part of the reproducible research requirement. Please send in PR whenever you have a contribution to the protocol source code. 

**Notice: Please pull the xqtl-pipeline source code repo (link embedded to text above) every day to keep track of updated codes. We are constantly making changes to it and we would like to ensure the latest version works.**

The project starts the same day you get these instructions, and ends in exactly one month. There will be many protocols to test as we continue to update the list in the upcoming month. If you have the energy / motivation please move on to the next protocol after you finish what you are working on.
I hope that you enjoy this exploration with me and Hao (and others in the lab when it comes to the point), and that we will continue working together throughout the rest of your study at Columbia.

## Cautions on computational resource

The demo data-set you use is trivial compared to the complete data-set it is extracted from. However computationally it might still be challenging to perform the analysis on your computer. For many computational steps you will need a desktop computer with at least 16GB memory and free disk space of 50GB. While the latter can be easily solved by using an external hard drive (costs as low as $50 for a decent sized external hard drive these days), it is not easy to upgrade memory. One option is to use Google Cloud to set up a virtual machine (VM) on the cloud, taking advantage of the $300 starters' gift credit. This should be enough for you to complete the rotation. You can start with 16GB memory and 50GB disk space and expand them as needed. The virtual machine should better be Linux (eg the popular Ubuntu Linux you can install the latest version available from Google Cloud) so you need to follow the setup instructions for Linux to configure the software environment. In fact, many other services, such as DigitalOcean, also offer starters credit. If for some reason you have to pay out of your pocket, we will be happy to reimburse that cost but only if you passed the rotation. 

Once you set it up, you should be able to connect it using SSH (see [here for a video for setting SSH key and connect to Google Cloud](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ibBF9YqveY)). Unlike your desktop, a cloud VM does not usually come with a graphical user interface (GUI) or graphical IDE. One possibility is to connect to the cloud server using JupyterLab, as [documented here](https://wanggroup.org/productivity_tips/remote-computer#through-jupyterlab). 

If you use Google Cloud and have fast enough of a internet connection, you can set up an virtual desktop for the VM so that you can operate through  GUI --- Google chrome Remote Desktop can help to do so. Command line version with JupyterLab server typically takes much less internet bandwidth than a virtual desktop.

In the future when you work at the lab we have our own "cloud" (the high performance computing cluster) with ample computational resource. So computational resource is not going to be an issue after your rotation. 
